---
title: Does artificial intelligence lets us work less?
date: 2023-03-20
---
Artificial intelligence has long been around. But the advancements have surfaced to light in recent years. We had AI talk back in the 1980s that how Skynet would take over the world one day. The Terminator franchise centered on AI being sentient.

But, the history tells and many such Hollywood films, the burden becomes more than it eases. For example, the machines in the Terminator franchise are so powerful they begin to think for themselves. Or decide to enslave humanity as seen in the Matrix films.

As humans to ease our lives we end up destroying. But that’s fiction. In the real world, when we introduced Bing AI to users, it created a mess by sometime giving scary answers and wanting to be friends with the users. The Bing AI, called Sydney would disregard facts when provided and would instead argue with the user about how they are incorrect.

Every tech company is climbing the bandwagon with its version of AI. ChatGPT in the fall of 2022 took the world by storm and since the companies have tried to mimic its success. Brave search and DuckDuckGO now show summarized versions of the search. Bing and Google (aka Bard) are trying hard, and so on. 

But, AI does not fare better without human intervention. You have to steer the direction of what it is you want the AI to do or it goes haywire. As we saw with Sydney above. ChatGPT is the only successful venture so far.

With machines such as your home appliances, sure they’ve eliminated manual labor but you have become more invested in learning how they work. If you don’t read its how-to manual or guide you will damage the machine or incur the cost of losing your money because service or repairs don’t come cheap.

If your dad does not know how to watch a YouTube video, he will have a hard time navigating the smartphone and accessing that app. More so, if he’s recently got his hands on a smartphone or isn’t computer literate. So the point is, you have to have the knowledge to work with technology and that includes AI and machines.

The debate about whether AI will replace human beings is futile.

You will need more skills to master the tech. I remember when ChatGPT hit the stage, everyone thought a writer's job is in danger. And that SEO folks will have a field day telling the AI tool to write articles and stuff keywords to rank their site. But again, you have to have the ability of a writer to ask the right questions. Or tell the tool what you are seeking so it can produce appropriate content/ answers. So you need specialists or experienced professionals. Most SEOs I know don’t know writing.

And even when the content is ready you can’t serve it to the world same as you don’t serve the dish you cooked to the guests right out of the pan. Some garnishing, some presentation, etc. is always required. Don’t assume AI has taken everything into account. The churned content is as good as the prompts given to it. A writer would then dot the i’s and cross the t’s.

You need a great deal of training. As has been the case with adapting to technology; cars, smartphones, computers, software, databases, and you name it. Heck, those maintaining the tools or tech will never be out of a job because who will be there? To manufacture, create, update, bug fix, etc.? Can’t let artificial intelligence take over the world now.

It is there to help you and assist you. But then you are needed to do more and be available more. Look at what smartphones and laptops did to us. Work now knows no borders or is limited by time zones. If you have either of those and an internet connection, you are available to work.

Today a doctor only needs a WhatsApp of your scan or report (that does not warrant urgent medical care) after the first visit. Before you would consult him and he would check to see what might be the case. Unless you have to pay a visit again, they can reply to you with what precautions you can take and any medicines to drop or add on WhatsApp. That makes them available to you outside their official clinic or work hours.

In an interview with Chris Voss, Lex Friedman talked about chatbots and the role they can play in negotiations. It was an exciting talk and Chris said while it's good innovation they can do some basics but you will almost always need human intervention. You have to show empathy which an AI lacks and that negotiation can turn ugly. As I said before, you need humans to steer chatbots to a model that increases their efficiency. And that, well... is always going to be the case.

For example, in what appeared to be a bug, ChatGPT showed other users' histories. It displayed the title of their conversation which is a breach of privacy. After that, the chatbot was taken offline by the OpenAPI team and when it came back online, user histories were missing. This proves my point from earlier paragraphs about human input.
